c{çá|vá TÜv{|äxá
aÉäxÅuxÜ ECCL
Brainstorming through the Sequence Universe:
Theories on the Protein Problem 1Brainstorming through the Sequence Universe: Theories on 
the Protein Problem 
 
Kyung Dae Ko1,2,*, Yoojin Hong1,3,*, Gaurav Bhardwaj1,2,, Teresa M. Killick1,2, Damian B. 
van Rossum1,2,¥, Randen L. Patterson1,2,¥ 
 
(1) Center for Computatio nal Proteomics, The Pennsyl vania State University  
(2) Department of Biology, The Pennsylvania State University 
(3) Department of Computer Science,  The Pennsylvania State University 
 
* These authors contributed equally to this work 
¥ Address correspondence to:  Randen L. Patterson, 230 Life Sc ience Bldg, University Park , PA 16802. Tel: 001-814-865-1668; 
Fax: 001-814-863-1357; E-mail:  rlp25@psu.edu
. 
 Damian B. van Rossum, 518 Wartik Laboratory, Un iversity Park, PA 16802. Tel: 001-814-863-
1007; Fax: 001-814-86 3-1357; E-mail:  dbv10@psu.edu
. 
 
Abstract 
Just as physicists strive to develop a TOE (th eory of everything), which explains and 
unifies the physical laws of th e universe, the life-sci entist wishes to uncover the TOE as it 
relates to cellular systems.  Th is can only be achieved with a quantitative platform that can 
comprehensively deduce and relate protein stru cture, functional, a nd evolution of genomes 
and proteomes in a comparative f ashion.  Were this perfected, proper analyses would start to 
uncover the underlying physical laws governing th e emergent behavior of biological systems 
and the evolutionary pressures responsible for func tional innovation.  In the near term, such 
methodology would allow the vast  quantities of uncharacterized (e.g. metagenomic samples) 
primary amino acid sequences to be rapidly deco ded.  Analogous to natural products found in 
the Amazon, genomes of living orga nisms contain large numbers of proteins that would prove 
useful as new therapeutics for human health, energy sources, and/or waste management 
solutions if they could be identified and characterized.  We previously theorized that 
phylogenetic profiles could provide a quantitat ive platform for obtaini ng unified measures of 
structure, function, and evoluti on (SF&E)(1).  In th e present manuscript, we present data that 
support this theory and demonstrates how refine ments of our analysis algorithms improve the 
performance of phylogenetic pr ofiles for deriving structural/f unctional relationships.    
  
 2Introduction 
The ‘protein problem’ has remained unsolved despi te decades of research(2;3). In principle, 
one expects that the primar y amino acid sequence of a protein de termines its structure, function, and 
evolutionary (SF&E) characteristics.  Yet, there still is no reliable method for predicting the native state 
structure of a protein and its function given only its sequence. Although the num ber of putative protein 
sequences of a given length is enormous, very few of these would fold rapidly and reproducibly and 
have useful function. In addition, inferring the ev olutionary relationships among highly divergent 
protein sequences is a daunting task.  In gener al, when pairwise sequenc e alignments between 
protein sequences fall below 25% identity, statistical measurement s do not provide support robust 
enough to identify clear phylogenetic re lationships, structural featur es, or protein function despite 
intensive research in this area(2; 4;5).  In this manuscript, we prop ose our updated strategies towards 
solving the ‘protein problem’ which are: (i) simple yet powerful, (ii) broad and relate to diverse aspects 
of proteins, (iii) interdisciplinary, and (i v) significant for th e understanding of life.  
 The anchor for our approach lies in the discovery  that phylogenetic pr ofiles are capable of 
measuring the fundamental properties of proteins.  Through cons truction of knowledge-base profiles 
related for either structural or  functional qualities, phylogenetic pr ofiles provide measurements which 
can be used to simultaneously infer evolutionary di stances, create functional models, and identify 
structural components of protein sequences from any organism(6-8).  Indeed, our rec ent publications 
and ongoing research demonstrate that SF&E information obtained from phylogenetic profiles are 
exceptionally informative to our la boratory experiments at multiple sca les (e.g. whole protein, single 
protein domain, and single amino acid)(1;9-13).  We  have used these analyses: (i) to reconstruct 
evolutionary histories(1;9), (ii) to identify functions in domains of unknown function(1; 11;12;14-16), (iii) 
to classify structural homologues of high s equence divergence(1)(Hong et al, Physics Archives 
November 2009), and (iv) to inform our biochemical  experimentation by isolating key amino acids 
important to protei n function(10-12;15). 
 
The power behind our phylogenetic profiles is derived from the Position-Specific Scoring 
Matrices (PSSMs, i.e. profile), wh ich contain a frequency table for subs titutions that occur in related 
sequences; PSSMs are a powerful meas ure of homology(17-19) .  Indeed, it is we ll-established that 
PSSMs contain more information than individual seq uences.  We take advantage of the increased 
information content of PSSMs and quant ify their alignments within a phylogenetic profile.  Under this 
paradigm, a protein is defined as a vector wher e each entry quantifies t he alignments of a query 
sequence with a PSSM.   
 Our strategy is designed to amplify and encode the pair-wise alignments possible for any given 
query sequence in a standardized manner (see Figure 1 and Hong et al Physics Archives 2009 for full 
descriptions).  The output of these comparisons is a composite [product] score of either zero [when 
there is no significant match] or a positive value [which measures the degree of successful matching 
of the protein sequence to each of the PSSMs]. This procedure can be readily adapted to make an 
unbiased comparison between a series of query s equences by subjecting them to the same 
screening analysis with the same set of PSSMs. Thus, each query sequence is represented in a 
vector of non-negative num bers in M dimensions (M= # of PSSMs tested).  Important ly, M dimensions 
can also be derived from standardiz ed measures of structural and c hemical features of the query 
sequence.  Further power in using phylogenetic pr ofiles as a framework for data encoding comes 
from the interoperability of the data matrix itself.  For exampl e, phylogenetic profile data spaces can 
be analyzed using a variety of distance measurem ents, clustering algorithms, and information 
visualization algorithms, to  name a few.  We propose that it is this ability  to compare the results 
obtained from multiple algorithm s using the same NXM data spac e that empowers protein-based 
phylogenetic profiles.    3Our strategy is unlike most other comput ational approaches which generally focus on 
structure, function, or ev olution individually .  Based on our recent advances, we have determined that 
phylogenetic profiles provide a robust and unified fr amework to decode SF&E information of protein 
sequences.  Using this paradigm we theorize that: (i) functional and evolutio nary measurements can 
quantitatively inform structural modeli ng to derive accurate atomic resolu tion structures; (ii) structural 
and functional measurements can inform evolutionary hi stories to derive accurate evolutionary rates, 
deep-branch relationships, and homologous regions wit hin each protein; and (iii) structural and 
evolutionary measures can provide information as to the location of functional ities and/or regulatory-
elements contained within any protei n. Should this theory be true, the speed at which biological 
processes and signaling networks woul d be decoded would be significantly increased.  In addition, it 
would drastically improve our ability to pinpoint func tional targets for currently  intractable problems 
such as developing mutation resistant pharmacophor e therapeutics, predicting functional mutations 
that may allow for cross-species viral infectio ns, and identifying the functional consequences of 
disease-causing polymorphisms in  humans. Perhaps most important ly, phylogenetic profiles perform 
in the “twilight zone” of sequence similarity(1;9).   Therefore, this approach can be harnessed to 
decode the most challenging protein datasets, and be scaled up to screen proteomes and the vast 
quantities of sequences being obtained from metagenomic and ot her large scale sequencing projects.  
In the present manuscript, we re port our recent advances in deriv ing useful measurements using 
phylogenetic profiles and improving our  analysis of these datasets.   
  4Results  
Theories on Structure/Function  
 One of the major challenges in the genomic era is annotating func tion to the vast quantities of 
sequence information now available.  Indeed, mo st of the protein sequence database lacks 
comprehensive annotation, even when experimental evidence exists.  Further, within structurally 
resolved and functionally annotated protein domains, additional func tionalities contained in these 
domains are not apparent.  To add further complicati on, small changes in t he amino-acid sequence 
can lead to profound changes in both structur e and function, underscoring the need for rapid and 
reliable methods to analyze these types of data.  Indeed, most proteins when queried using popular 
algorithms for identifying protein function (e.g. NCBI CDD, Pfam, SMART, InterPro scan) return few, if 
any, results that are statistically significant(20-23).  In an attempt to overcome these limitations, we 
have utilized phylogenetic profiles, and have had so me remarkable results.  We have been 
successful in identifying fundamental protein intera ctions (e.g. protein-nucleic acid, protein-lipid, 
protein-protein, protein-small mo lecule)(1;10-15).  Throughout this work, we have made a number of 
predictions such as: (i) PSSMs of  related function can contain “h omology” even if they represent 
different structures, (ii) PSSMs libraries generated using specific folds can accurately identify 
homologous folds, (iii) PSSM libraries generated for a specific activity can accurately identify 
homologous functions in proteins of diverse struct ure, as well as different iating activity within a 
specific fold, and (iv)  single- amino acid phylogenetic profiles c an obtain quantitative functional 
thresholds.     
These theories are supported by  our analysis of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs).  RNAs in a cell 
generally have many functions such as (i) a carrier  of genetic information,  (ii) a catalyst of 
biochemical reactions, (iii) an adapter molecule in  protein synthesis, and (i v) a regulator of RNA 
splicing and maintenance of the telomeres or chro mosome ends. If we are to identify the all the 
functions of any specific RNA, we need to understand t he functions of their binding proteins as they 
can control post-transcriptional processes such as pre-mRNA processing, splicing, and translation, 
and likely regulate RNA-enzymatic ac tivity (e.g. di cer).  However,  Since RNA structures are varied; 
the structures of RBPs that inte ract with RNA are diverse. Indeed, the known RBPs can be classified 
into six families by their basic binding moti fs (24), and as a group RBPs have wildly different 
structures. In fact, even within the same RBP family, the RNA inte raction site within the structure 
need not be conserved (24). To compound these probl ems, not all members of a particular fold-
specific group bind to RNA. Taken toget her, it is difficult to identify RBPs either computationally or 
biochemically. 
 Multiple computational algor ithms have been developed to attack these questions. Examples 
include support vector machi ne learning (SVM) and Hidden Markov Models (HMM) (25;26). Although 
these methods have utility, they suffer in divergent dat asets, as well as in correctly characterizing the 
nucleotide substrate (e.g. DNA vs RNA).  Based on our previous studies on lipid-binding, it is 
reasonable to consider that specif ic PSSM libraries can be construct ed for these attributes. To test 
this hypothesis, we constructed RBP-specific PSSM libraries and quantified the performance of 
phylogenetic profiles for the characterization of mu ltiple benchmark data sets of RBPs (see Methods 
for complete description).  In to tal, our results provide substantia l evidence that PSSM libraries can 
be used to obtain quantitative thresholds for RBPs  and other nucleic acid-protein interactions.  
Further, we propose that this strategy can be im plemented to obtain refined measurements for any 
protein function.    
Structural/Functional Data 
Our first training set consists of 55 RNA -recognition Motifs (RRM) domain-containing 
sequences and negative sequences; all of which were  curated from the y east database and the 
Protein Databank (PDB). Generally, RRM domains are ~90 amino acids long and are composed of  5four beta-sheets packed against two alpha-helices.  These motifs are often found in tandem within 
protein sequences and are known to bind a variabl e number (2-8) of RNA molecules (27).  In 
addition, this motif also appears in a few single st randed DNA-binding proteins , and can also facilitate 
protein-protein interactions instead  of nucleotides (24;28). Due to t he vast literature on this class of 
proteins, RRMs provide an excellent  model system for testing our hy potheses. Importantly, all of the 
negative sequences were biochemically demonstrated not to bind nucleic  acids (29). All datasets, raw 
data, FASTA files for sequences and scripts used in the manuscript are available upon request. 
 Figure 1 depicts the strategy we  employed. Initially, we collect master sequences from a 
biological database. In this case, master se quences were identified from the non-redundant NCBI 
database using PSI-BLAST queried wit h known RRM domains (e-value ≤ 1X10
-2).  Next, we generate 
PSSM profiles from thes e master sequences (see Methods). Following, query sequences are aligned 
using GDDA-BLAST as previously described (1;9).   In brief, query sequences are modified by adding 
a standard sequence length from  a PSSM (“seed”), which creates a c onsistent initiation site for 
alignments (see Methods for complete description).  “S eeds” in this study are generated from profiles 
by taking a 10% of the profile sequence from the N-terminus and C-terminus of the PSSM.  Query 
sequences are then aligned with t he parent PSSMs using reverse pos ition specific-BLAST (rps-
BLAST). From these data, % ident ity and % coverage are used for alig nment filtering.  Alignments 
above threshold are used to calculate normalized sco res for all residues in the query sequence, the 
average scores of each query, and norms of the average scores on the basis of the positive 
alignments (for a complete descr iption see Methods). Following, fa lse positive sequences can be 
filtered by thresholds derived fr om the norms (average scores) fo r all queries.  All scripts, PSSM 
libraries, and sequence FASTA files used in this study are available upon request.  
 
Characterizing single-fold RBPs:  
 Figure 1A ( inset ) depicts the structure of an atypical (truncated) RRM domai n from yeast SET1 
protein, a histone methyltransferase. Popular domai n-prediction algorithms su ch as NCBI Conserved 
Domain Database (CDD) and Interproscan do not detec t this RRM domain within SET1 at statistically 
significant thresholds (data not shown). When we analyzed SET1 using Gestalt Domain Detection 
Algorithm Basic Local Alignment Tool (GDDA-BLAST) to generate phy logenetic profiles (1;9) with 100 
RRM-specific PSSMs, we observe that these profiles align in SET1 and correspond to the position of the RRM domain (Figure 1A, see Methods). Thus, these PSSM profiles are sensitive enough to detect this highly divergent RRM domain.   Figure 2A shows that the sequences in the training dataset are completely separated into positive and negative groups. The minimum score of the positive group is ~224 and the maximum score for the negative 
 6group is ~127. Using the same library of PSSMs, we then performed the sa me analysis on a testing 
set. The testing set consists of 20 RRM c ontaining sequences and 135 negative sequences. We 
achieve 100% accuracy in this testing set using t he threshold derived from our training set (Figure 
2B-C). We compared our performance to two other popular algorithms (Interproscan and SVM-PROT) (Figure 3A-B)(23;30). We observe that phylogenetic profiles and Interproscan provide robust measures, while SVM-PROT does not perform well in either the training or the testing dataset.   To extend upon these findings, 
we performed 
similar analyses for additional classes of single- fold RBPs. These include KH1, double-stranded RNA, 
and zinc fingers (24). The results from these experiments are provi ded in Figure 3C-D. We observe 
that phylogenetic profiles have 100% accuracy for all single-fold RBPs tested. In comparison, 
Interproscan performs sim ilarly to phylogenetic profiles while SVM-PROT performs poorly in all of 
these datasets.  
Characterizing RBPs containing 
multiple folds:  
In order to comprehensively 
catalogue RBPs, methods are needed that can account for both characterized and uncharacterized folds. Four major classes of RBPs contain multiple folds for their respective target (24). These include mRNA, tRNA, rRNA, and snRNA. For these classes, we created PSSM libraries for the diverse folds that can accommodate these interactions. The results from our test ing set are presented 
in Figure 4. We achieve 100% accuracy in these datasets. Comparatively, SVM-
PROT performs poorly in all data sets.  We could not compare the performance of Interproscan for predicting RNA-binding function as it does not model the 
 7functionality per se ; rather it provides fold-specific information. 
 In 2008, Shazman et al. demonstrated that SVM methods c ould be improved by incorporating 
electrostatic surface patch information into their analyses (31). Hence, this RBP study provides an 
excellent benchmark dataset, as we ll as another algorithm with whic h to compare our performance. 
Initially, our preliminary experiment using this testing set was performed with fold-specific PSSMs; 
however, these fold-specific PSSMs were insens itive in this dataset. We wondered whether our 
results could be improved by merely increasing t he number of PSSMs in our library. To accomplish 
this task, we searched the PROSITE database for t he key-word “RNA-binding” (32). The results from 
this search were then manually confirmed to ensure the specificity of these sequences. Importantly, 
the structure of these sequences was not taken into account for inclusion in the PSSM library. 
Following, additional sequences were identified by statistically sign ificant sequence similarity and 
PSSMs were generated from the non-redundant  NCBI database using PSI-BLAST (see 
Methods)(17).  
 
Using this expanded functional library ( 2695 PSSMs), we then analyzed a training set 
containing 100 single-stranded RBPs  and 127 negative sequences (Figure 5A-B).  Under these 
conditions, we see a clear separation of positiv e and negative sequences. In our testing dataset, 
which is comprised of 37 positive and 118 negative sequences from the Shazman et al study (31), we 
achieve 100% specificity, 96.8%  accuracy, and 86.5% sensitivity.  In comparison, these authors 
reported 90% specificity, 88% ac curacy, and 80% sensitivity (Fi gure 5C). Thus, with the expanded 
PSSM library, our results rival those previously obtained.   8Under the same 
paradigm, we generated additional PSSMs for double-stranded RNA-binding (dsRNA), single-stranded DNA-binding (ssDNA), and double-stranded DNA binding (dsDNA) (Figure 6). We then compared our results to those from the Shazman et al study (31) for the classification of ssRNA and dsDNA-binding domains. These authors obtained 50% specificity, 51% accuracy, and 53% sensitivity within this dataset. Our results using either the ssRNA or dsDNA PSSM libraries are much improved: 97%/83% specificity, 91%/80% accuracy, and 86%/76% 
sensitivity, respectively. 
We also compared our results in additional test ing sets curated from PROSITE (32), for proper 
classification of dsRNA vs. dsDNA,  ssRNA vs . ssDNA, and ssRNA vs. dsDNA (Figure 6B). Although 
attempted, Shazman et al c oncluded that further refinement  of their method was needed to 
accomplish these more difficult comparisons (31) . Conversely, we obtain robust measurements for 
these comparisons (Figure 6), in particular for ds RNA binding, where we achieve 100% accuracy. 
  
As a final comparison to the Shazman et al st udy (31), we investigat ed whether phylogenetic 
profiles could accurately discriminate between RRM  domains that bind RNA and those that don’t. 
Using electrostatic patches, they were able to accu rately segregate these type s of RRM domains with 
100% accuracy. In our first atte mpt (Figure 7A), we could not segregate these RRM domains using 
our ssRNA PSSM library where RRM profiles were re moved.  To overcome this limitation, we 
designed a new residue-based phylogenet ic profile (Figure 7B).  This  phylogenetic profile employs a 
residue distribution matrix developed by Bock et al ( 33).  The matrix is com posed of the frequency of 
the 20 amino acids comprising the pr otein, as well as 3 descriptors  of chemical features. The 3 
descriptors represent global compos ition of specific chemical gro ups, and consist of composition, 
transition, and distribution. The composition (C) is the number of amino acids within a particular group 
divided by total number of amino acid in all c hemical groups. Transition (T) is the frequency of 
transition from one chemical group to another chemical group in a s equence. Distribution (D) is the 
chain length within the first, 25%, 50%, 75% and 100% of the amino acid in a specific chemical group 
(33). Following, we cluster the sequences using Hi erarchical clustering and Pearson’s correlation. 
The results from this experiment are presented in Figure 7C. Using this method, we observe a clear 
segregation of RNA-binding RRMs from non RNA-binding RRMs with excellent statistical support. 
 
 9
Theories on Structural Homology Detection 
 It has been proposed that the number of distinct native state fold s is extremely limited(34).  
This suggests that with accurate measurements of homology, inferenc es of structur e from primary 
amino acid sequences are possible.   Indeed, significant advances have been made in this arena with 
tools such as Rosetta, PHYRE, and MUSTANG( 35-37).  In addition, algorithms which create 
structural predictions using physical laws and cons traints also exist (e.g. ZAM, M-TASSER)(38;39).  
Although effective, all of these al gorithms suffer from either comput ational constraints in predicting 
secondary structure (38;39)  and/or barriers in homology detecti on(40;41).   We theorize that a 
computational pipeline could be developed using phylogenetic profil es for rapid homology detection 
and secondary structure annotation.   Once derived, this information could inform 3D prediction 
algorithms to improve their performance.  To this end, we have init iated multiple lines of research to 
identify structural homology using benchmark st ructural datasets such SABmark, Balibase, and 
SCOP(42-44).    
Homology Detection 
As shown in Figure 8, phylogenetic profiles are c apable of identifying homolog ous folds in sequences 
containing less than 25% identity.  In this performance evaluati on, we analyzed 534 proteins 
representing 61 SCOP folds from the Sabmark “twilight” dataset ( 42) with phylogenetic profiles.  
These results were compared to other benchmark methods using Rece iver Operating Characteristics 
curve analysis. ROC curve shows the sensitivity (i.e . True Positive Pairs(TP)/(TP+False Negative   10Pairs(FN)) of each method at different  false positive rates (i.e. 1 – TN/( TN+False Positive Pairs)).  As 
the ROC curve of a given method is closer to left-t op corner of the graph, t he method is considered 
more accurate. To calculate sensitivity at differ ent false positive rate, given a query, top-K sequences 
with highest correlation or smallest e-value/p-value are considered to  be returned as related by each 
method, as increasing K (see Methods  for complete description).   
 
Our results are very promising.  Our prelim inary data demonstrates t hat phylogenetic profiles 
generated using embedded alignment data generated using GD DA-BLAST (1) outperform all 
algorithms tested (Figure 8).  Thes e algorithms include SAMT2K, Prof  Sim, and FFAS, with the latter 
considered to be the current “ gold-standard” algorithm( 45-47).  Our performance on this dataset one 
year ago seemed to be at the “glass ceiling” as FFAS (red), GDDA-BLAST (magenta), SAMT2K (not 
shown), and Prof Sim (not shown) all had relatively comparable performance in this dataset (29%, 
27%, 23%, and 20% sensitivity at false-pos itive rate<0.01, respectively).   
 We speculated that our performance could be improved by either  optimizing our PSSM 
libraries and/or modification of our scoring schemes.  To address the former, we  created fold-specific 
libraries using representative sequences for each fo ld that do not appear in our testing set.  After 
collecting representative sequences, we generat ed PSSMs from these sequences or their 
homologues using PSI-BLAST(17). Homologues of representative sequences were obtained using 
PSI-BLAST and the NCBI NR database.  Each sequenc e is searched in the NCBI NR database using 
PSI-BLAST (e=1X10-6, 6 iterations). The homol ogous sequences obtained from this search are then 
converted PSSMs using PSI-BLAST.  Following, redundancy is removed.  Using this process, we 
obtained a total of 36,146 PSSMs for the 61 folds in our  testing set. To test whether fold-specific 
PSSMs have improved utility, we altered how we encoded them into the phylogenetic 
profile.  Specifically, using our 
previous multi-fold PSSM libraries, each PSSM represented a unique M for each query N.  For our fold-specific PSSM libraries, each M represents the total score for the alignments obtained for each PSSM library.  Thus for this experiment, the M dimension is equal to the number of unique fold libraries (M=61).      In this study, we also tested different scoring schemes/conditions for GDDA-BLAST. The first is a hybrid log-weighted Pearson’s correlation value. In this Log 
Weighted scoring scheme, 
three phylogenetic profiles are generated for each sequence with three different scores, such as hit, coverage , and 
 11identity , separately.  Since a PSSM is likely to have no significant information to measure sequences 
if the profile is positive with many sequences, each hit, coverage , and identity  score for each profile in 
a phylogenetic profile is adjusted by the frequency that the profile is positive on 534 sequences so 
that the scores of t he profile has less weight when the correlation between two sequences is 
calculated. For exam ple, the adjusted hit score of the original hit score h between a query and a 
profile x becomes )1(log2
Nhα×
 where αis # of sequences which the profile x is positive and N is the 
total number of sequences to compare (N=534 in our  test set). Pearson’s correlation between two 
sequences is calculated as multiplying Pearson’s co rrelation of each different score of phylogenetic 
profiles of the sequences.   
 In our fold-specific hybrid scoring scheme, we calculate hits, %coverage, and %identity for 
each fold group by summing up each hits, %coverage, i dentity for each PSSM in th e same fold group, 
then divide each sum by # of positive PSSMs in t he group. Following, as for the Log Weighted 
scoring scheme, Pearson's correlation between two quer ies is calculated by multiplying Pearson's 
correlation of each different score of  phylogenetic profile s of the queries. 
    
 The improvements to our PSSM libraries and scoring schemes were successful for improving 
our performance.  Our best results are achieved using the Hybrid Log We ighted scoring scheme with 
a 60% coverage threshold (Figure 8 cyan), although th is is negligibly better than a 40% coverage 
threshold (Figure 8 yellow).  Im portantly, our performance is ~11%  better than FFAS (29% accuracy 
vs. GDDA-BLAST 40% sensitivity at false-positive rate of 0.01).   
 
Conclusions 
 Although simple to ask, questions related to pr otein structure/function are often difficult to 
answer.  Nevertheless, if thes e parameters could be accurately measured, our understanding of 
biological systems would be dramat ically enhanced. One could envis ion a future where angstrom 
level structural models, comprehensive functional  annotation, and precise evolutionary rates of 
proteins can all be achieved computat ionally from a single dataset.   In  this study, we determined that 
phylogenetic profiles provide a r obust quantitative measurem ent of RNA-binding function as well as 
homology detection in the “twilight zone” of sequence similarity. These conclusions are supported by 
a number of experiments that dem onstrate our ability to: (i) detec t highly-divergent RBPs, (ii) 
discriminate between closely related targets (e.g . dsRNA vs. dsDNA), (iii) differentiate between 
classical RBP folds that bind RN A and those that don’t, and (iv) out perform existing algorithms on the 
Sabmark “twilight-zone” dataset.  Moreover, all of these results were obtained using only primary 
amino acid sequences, and in some cases their chemical features. 
 
 In our previous lipid-binding studies using ph ylogenetic profiles, we did not have numerical 
thresholds which could be used to threshold positiv e and negative results (1;13).  Thus, these results 
were all confirmed experimentally (1;10;12;14;15).  We chose to devel op our quantitative thresholds 
using nucleotide binding as a benc hmark function as they are comprised of well characterized yet 
diverse structural folds having a variety of ligand specificity (24;31;48). Our results demonstrate that 
construction of PSSMs that represent specific folds and/or activities can be used to generate accurate 
and sensitive phylogenetic profiles.   Indeed, fold-specific PSSMs libr aries can accurately identify 
homologous folds (Figure 3 and 8).  Similarly, f unction-specific PSSMs libraries can accurately 
identify homologous functions in pr oteins of diverse structure (Fi gure 6).  In addition, when these 
phylogenetic profiles are informed by amino acid physi o-chemical properties (33), they are capable of 
differentiating activity within a specific  fold (e.g. RRM) (F igure 7B-C).    
  12 Similar to accurately assigning nucleotide-binding function, ident ifying related structures of 
high divergence is also challenging with current technology.  Indeed, there appears to be a “glass 
ceiling” in benchmark datasets, such as the Sabmark, whereby t he most sensitive algorithms have 
only 25-30% sensitivity at statis tical limits (false positive rate  =0.01).  Using our current 
measurements, phylogenetic prof iles have started to break through the “glass ceiling” (~40% 
sensitivity at statistical limits).  It is tantalizing to consider  that optimization of our scoring schemes 
and PSSM libraries could detect even more distantly related structural homologues.  Were this 
possible, approaches such as ours could inform stat e-of-the-art tertiary m odeling programs. These 
programs often cannot perform structur al modeling due, in large part, to  rate-limiting calculations of 
secondary structure and/or lack of sensitivity for detecting hom ologous folds with high sequence 
divergence.    An implication that is emerging from our studies is that PSSMs der ived from structurally distinct 
but functionally conserved sequences contain “func tional homology” that c an be measured.  This 
functional homology may be due to the energetic pr operties necessary to support various protein-
ligand interactions.  Indeed, studies from Chen and Li m (49) demonstrate that  the energetic features 
of DNA- and RNA-binding sites are distinct from each ot her, yet still maintain some global similarities.  
In our lipid-binding studies, our PSSM library was co mprised of numerous folds for a variety of lipid-
specificities (e.g. ENTH, C2, PH, FYVE, etc) (1).  While diverse,  these PSSMs have a propensity to 
align in similar regions which bind lipids as demons trated by us and others (10;50-52).  Similarly, 
PSSM libraries constructed from structurally diverse RBDs are specific for variety RNA-binding 
functions (e.g. mRNA, tRNA, snRNA, etc) (Figure 4) .  These results imply t hat this is a general 
phenomenon and suggests that there are conserved functional moti fs that can exist in multiple 
structural contexts.    
Since PSSM libraries can quantitatively relate dive rgent structures, it is reasonable to consider 
that these same libraries could id entify novel RBDs in folds which hav e yet to be characterized.  An 
analogous and relevant example is the TRP_2 domain, a cons erved domain contained in all 
canonical transient receptor potent ial channels (TRPCs).  We demonstrated that this domain is 
detected by lipid-binding PSSMs which do not contai n this fold, and that TRP_2 domains bind lipid 
(10).   Further, upon identif ication of novel folds, they can be incorporated into the PSSM library, 
iteratively improving it.    
Should this be true, a powerful PSSM libra ry could be generated for any function with a 
sufficient knowledgebase (e.g. kinase, phosphatase, ATP-binding, GTP-bindi ng, etc); however, a 
single domain of known function is sufficient to create a sensitive P SSM library (e.g. KH, RRM, zinc-
finger, etc).  This approach could be used to annotat e the vast numbers of DUF-containing proteins 
(domains of unknown function) an d sequences containing no annotation. The fold-specific results in 
this manuscript and our ongoing studies  strongly suggest that fold-f unction specific PSSMs provide 
the most sensitive/specific libra ries (see Hong et al Physics Archives, Noveber 2009).  Thus, as new 
structures/functions are identified, fold-function specific PSSM libraries can be generated using PSI-
BLAST (17).    In conclusion, we propose that future wo rk aimed at creating comprehensive and refined 
PSSM libraries.  In order to accomplish this goal  requires taking control of the established PSSM 
databases (e.g. CDD, Pfam, SMART, etc) by re-annotating them  with standardized and 
experimentally validated ontology.  Further, refi ning our methods for generating PSSM libraries has 
the potential to exponentially increas e the structural/functional annotati on of all classes of proteins 
across taxa.  Such an advance would have broad im pacts on human health and disease, as well as 
basic science endeavors.   13 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by the Searle Young In vestigators Award and star t-up money from PSU 
(RLP), NCSA grant TG-MCB070027N (RLP, DVR), The National Science Foundation 428-15 691M 
(RLP, DVR), and The National Inst itutes of Health R01 GM087410-01 (RLP, DVR). This project was 
also funded by a Fellowship from the Eberly College of Sciences and the Huck Institutes of the Life 
Sciences (DVR) and a grant with t he Pennsylvania Department of H ealth using Tobacco Settlement 
Funds (DVR). The Department of Health specific ally disclaims responsibility for any analyses, 
interpretations, or conclusions. We would especially  like to thank Jason Holmes and the CAC center 
for their superior support.  We would also like to thank Drs. R obert E. Rothe, Jim White, Barbara Van 
Rossum, F. Stone Capture, Flattus McG hee van Vollmar for creative dialogue. 
 
Methods  Collection of master sequen ces and generation of PSSMs 
 To generate PSSMs for functional or structural -specific folds, we first collected master 
sequences from the NCBI NR database and the literature. A ll sequences were either structurally 
resolved or were experimentally validated for the desired f unction.  All PSSM master sequences used 
in this study are available upon request. 
 
Preparation of function or structure-speci fic PSSM set 
 To generate the PSSM set for a s pecific protein function or stru cture fold, we first collected 
protein sequences which are known to be related to the function or structure of our interest. For the 
PSSM set, we generated PSSMs with t he collected sequences or the sequences expanded from the 
collected sequences using PSI-BLAST.  For expansi on, each collected sequence is searched against 
NCBI NR database by PSI-BLAST (with the option of -e 1X10
-3 –h 1X10-6). Among the returned 
sequences, we filtered out the sequenc es whose pairwise identity to t he query sequence is more than 
90% and redundant sequences in the set. And, fo r PSSM generation for those expanded sequences, 
PSI-BLAST (with the option of –h 1X10-6) was used again.  All PSSM sets, which have been used for 
our test, will be provided upon request.  
Datasets for our experiments contain sets of RBPs and non-nucleoti de binding proteins 
(NNBPs). The sets of RBPs consist of specific (single-fold) RBP and tar get-based (multi-fold) RBP 
groups. Sets of single-fold RBPs were constructed using RNA binding motif as defined in Chen et al 
[3]. Based on these definitions, proteins were searched by key words (e.g. RNA-binding, DNA-
binding, nucleotide-binding, etc)  in NCBI and PROSITE protein databases, and manually verified for 
each class. Sets of multi-fold RBPs were bu ilt for mRNA-, tRNA-, rRNA-, and snRNA-binding 
proteins. Sequences for each class were collected by  keyword searches and manually verified. The 
NNBPs dataset was obtained from Stawiski et al. [13]. The RBP and DBP datasets used in Figure 7 
were obtained from Shazman et al [2]. All dat asets and sequences are available upon request. 
 
Phylogenetic profile 
See Hong et al Physics Archives, November 2009 for complete description. 
 
Calculation of scores 
 Theoretically, a protein should align best with PSSMs of similar fold and/or function. Based on 
this hypothesis, we have developed a scoring scheme to calculate a residue score which represents 
the occurrence of identical and positive residues from each query-PSSM alignment above threshold. 
Raw scores for each residue are calculated by sco ring a value=2 for identities and value=1 for 
positive substitutions from each alignment.  These values are then summed for all alignments at each 
position to obtain a total residue score.  Following,  these scores are normalized using the series of  14equations shown below.  Equation (1) finds highly conserved residues whose score is above the 
average residue score in the sequence. Equation (2 ) recalculates the av erage score of these 
residues as a representative score for each sequence.  Equation (3) calculates the norms of average 
scores to reduce the effect of the length.  This dat a can be used to obtain thresholds with positive and 
negative training sets.  The positive threshold is t he minimum score from the positive group and the 
negative threshold is the maximal score from the negative group.  
 
total score residue raw
query SUM =- NS SCLEN⎛⎞
⎜⎟⎝⎠
          (1)     PNS
query
residue = SumASCNR             (2) 
 
query
average score
query  =  *100 ASNORM *2 LEN      (3) 
 
  where NS
residue  = The normalized score of a re sidue,             
           SC raw = The raw score of a residue, 
           SUM total score  = The sum of total query score,  
           LEN query = The query length, 
           ASC query = The average query score,      
           SUM PNS = The sum of positive normalized scores 
           NR residue  = The number of residues with positive scores 
           NORM average score  = The norm of an average score 
           AS query = The average query score 
 
Residue Distribution Matrix 
 Using the amino acid positions as defined by GDDA-BLAST, we incorporated the residue 
distribution matrix developed by Bock et al (33). This matrix measures  the chemical characteristics of 
a protein based on its primary ami no acid sequence. The results obtai ned from this matrix are then 
included in our NXM phylogenetic pr ofiles.  Briefly, domain boundaries  are calculated for each query 
from the overlapping PSSM alignments as previously descr ibed (1;15).  Follo wing, amino-acid 
positions are isolated using Equations 1-3 (see calc ulation of scores).  Equat ion (4) calculates the 
amino acid frequency of all residues  obtained from equation (3).  We then calcul ate the composition 
(C), transition (T), and distri bution (D) of amino acids in t heir physio-chemical groups. The 
composition (C) is the number of  amino acids with a particular gr oup (i.e. hydrophobic, positively and 
negatively charged residues) divided by total number of  amino acid in all chemical groups. The 
transition (T) is the frequency of transition from one chemical group to another chemical group in the 
sequence. The distribution (D) is the chain length within the first, 25%, 50%, 75% and 100% of the 
amino acid for a specific chemical  group [9]. Therefore, our matrix is  composed of 20 features of the 
frequency, 3 composition feat ures, 1 transition feature,  and 15 distribution features.  These matrices 
are then clustered in the N-dime nsion by hierarchical clusteri ng using Pearson’s correlation.  
  
                                                                     (4) 
 
Statistical Analysis 
Using discriminative measurements [19,20], we assayed the performance of all algorithms used in the 
study for sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy. A bbreviations: true positives (TP), true negatives (TN), 
false positives (FP) and false negatives (FN).  All p- values in this study were derived using Student T-
test, with error bars reflecting the standard deviation of the dataset.   
 # of an amino acidThe composition of an amino acid= 100 # of total amino acids× 15TPSensitivity = 100%TP FN×+                     (5)                   TNSpecificity = 100%TN FP×+             (6) 
TP TNAccuracy = 100%TP TN FP FN+×++ +      (7) 
 
Reference List 
 
 1.  Ko,K.D., Hong,Y., Chang,G.S., Bhardwaj,G., van Rossum,D.B., and Patterson,R.L. 2008. Phylogenetic Profiles 
as a Unified Framework for Measuring Pr otein Structure, Function and Evolution. Physics Archives   
arXiv:0806.239, q-bio.Q . 
 2.  Ponting,C.P., and Russell,R.R. 2002.  The natural history of protein domains. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct.  
31:45-71. 
 3.  Vogel,C., Bashton,M., Kerrison,N.D., Chothia,C., and Te ichmann,S.A. 2004. Structure, function and evolution of 
multidomain proteins. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.  14:208-216. 
 4.  Park,J., Karplus,K., Barrett,C ., Hughey,R., Haussler,D., Hubbard ,T., and Chothia,C. 1998. Sequence 
comparisons using multiple sequences detect three times as many remote homologues as pairwise methods. J. 
Mol. Biol.  284:1201-1210. 
 5.  Lassmann,T., and Sonnhammer,E.L. 2005. Kalign--an accurate and fast multiple sequence alignment algorithm. 
BMC. Bioinformatics.  6:298. 
 6.  Pellegrini,M., Marcotte,E.M., T hompson,M.J., Eisenberg,D., and Yeates,T.O. 1999. Assigning protein functions by 
comparative genome analysis: prot ein phylogenetic profiles. Proc. Natl. Acad Sci U. S. A  96:4285-4288. 
 7.  Kim,Y., and Subramaniam,S. 2006. Locally defined protein phylogenetic profiles reveal previously missed protein 
interactions and functional relationships. Proteins  62:1115-1124. 
 8.  Wu,J., Mellor,J.C., and DeLisi,C. 2005. Deciphering protein network organization using phylogenetic profile 
groups. Genome Inform.  16:142-149. 
 9.  Chang,G.S., Hong,Y., Ko,K.D., Bhardwaj,G., Holmes,E.C., Patterson,R.L., and van Rossum,D.B. 2008. 
Phylogenetic profiles reveal evolutionary relationships wi thin the "twilight zone" of sequence similarity. Proc. Natl. 
Acad Sci U. S. A  105:13474-13479. 
 10.  van Rossum,D.B., Oberdick,D., R baibi,Y., Bhardwaj,G., Barrow,R.K., Niko laidis,N., Snyder,S.H., Kiselyov,K., and 
Patterson,R.L. 2008. TRP_2, a Lipid/Trafficking Domain T hat Mediates Diacylglycerol-induced Vesicle Fusion. J. 
Biol. Chem.  283:34384-34392. 
 11.  Chakraborty,A., Koldobskiy,M.A., Sixt,K.M., Julu ri,K.R., Mustafa,A.K., Snowman,A.M., van Rossum,D.B., 
Patterson,R.L., and Snyder,S.H. 2008. H SP90 regulates cell survival via i nositol hexakisphosphate kinase-2. 
Proc. Natl. Acad Sci U. S. A  105:1134-1139. 
 12.  Mustafa,A.K., van Rossum,D.B., Patterson,R.L., Maag ,D., Ehmsen,J.T., Gazi,S.K., C hakraborty,A., Barrow,R.K., 
Amzel,L.M., and Snyder,S.H. 2009. Glutamatergic regulation of  serine racemase via reversal of PIP2 inhibition. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A . 
 13.  van Rossum,D.B., Patterson,R.L., Sharma,S., Barro w,R.K., Kornberg,M., Gill,D.L., and Snyder,S.H. 2005. 
Phospholipase Cgamma1 controls su rface expression of TRPC3 throu gh an intermolecular PH domain. Nature  
434:99-104. 
 14.  Caraveo,G., van Rossum,D.B., Patterson,R.L., Sny der,S.H., and Desiderio,S. 2006. Action of TFII-I outside the 
nucleus as an inhibitor of agonist-induced calcium entry. Science  314:122-125. 
 15.  Hong,Y., Chalkia,D., Ko,K.D., Bhardwaj,G., Chang,G.S., van Rossum,D.B., and Patterson,R.L. 2009. 
Phylogenetic Profiles Reveal Structural and Functional Determinants of Lipid-binding. Journal of Proteomics and 
Bioinformatics 139-149.  16 16.  Zachos,N.C., van Rossum,D.B., Li,X., Caraveo,G., Sarker,R., Cha,B., Mohan,S., Desiderio,S., Patterson,R.L., 
and Donowitz,M. 2009. Phospholipase C-{gamma} binds dire ctly to the Na+/H+ exc hanger 3 and is required for 
calcium regulation of exchange activity. J. Biol. Chem. 
 17.  Altschul,S.F., Madden,T.L., Schaffer,A.A., Zhang,J ., Zhang,Z., Miller,W., and Lipman,D.J. 1997. Gapped BLAST 
and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of pr otein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res.  25:3389-3402. 
 18.  Schaffer,A.A., Wolf,Y.I., Ponting,C.P., Koonin,E.V ., Aravind,L., and Altschul,S.F. 1999. IMPALA: matching a 
protein sequence against a collection of PSI-BL AST-constructed position-specific score matrices. Bioinformatics  
15:1000-1011. 
 19.  Henikoff,S., and Henikoff,J.G. 1997. Embedding strategies fo r effective use of informat ion from multiple sequence 
alignments. Protein Sci.  6:698-705. 
 20.  Sonnhammer,E.L., Eddy,S.R., and Durbin,R. 1997. Pfam : a comprehensive database of protein domain families 
based on seed alignments. Proteins  28:405-420. 
 21.  Letunic,I., Copley,R.R., Schmidt,S ., Ciccarelli,F.D., Doerks,T., Schultz, J., Ponting,C.P., and Bork,P. 2004. 
SMART 4.0: towards genomic data integration. Nucleic Acids Res.  32 Database issue :D142-D144. 
 22.  Marchler-Bauer,A., Anderson,J. B., Cherukuri,P.F., Wees e-Scott,C., Geer,L.Y., Gwad z,M., He,S., Hurwitz,D.I., 
Jackson,J.D., Ke,Z. et al 2005. CDD: a Conserv ed Domain Database for protein classification. Nucleic Acids Res.  
33 Database Issue :D192-D196. 
 23.  Mulder,N., and Apweiler,R. 2007. InterPro and InterP roScan: tools for protein sequence classification and 
comparison. Methods Mol. Biol.  396:59-70. 
 24.  Chen,Y., and Varani,G. 2005. Protein families and RNA recognition. FEBS J.  272:2088-2097. 
 25.  Karplus,K., Sjolander,K., Barrett,C., Cline,M., H aussler,D., Hughey,R., Holm,L., and Sander,C. 1997. Predicting 
protein structure using hidden Markov models. Proteins  Suppl 1 :134-139. 
 26.  Han,L.Y., Cai,C.Z., Lo,S.L., Chung,M.C., and Chen,Y.Z . 2004. Prediction of RNA-binding proteins from primary 
sequence by a support vector machine approach. RNA.  10:355-368. 
 27.  Shamoo,Y., bdul-Manan,N., and Williams,K.R. 1995. Mult iple RNA binding domains (RBDs) just don't add up. 
Nucleic Acids Res.  23:725-728. 
 28.  Corsini,L., Bonnal,S., Basquin,J., Hothorn,M., Sc heffzek,K., Valcarcel,J., and Sa ttler,M. 2007. U2AF-homology 
motif interactions are required for al ternative splicing regulation by SPF45. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.  14:620-629. 
 29.  Stawiski,E.W., Gregoret,L.M., and Mandel-Gutfreund,Y.  2003. Annotating nucleic acid-binding function based on 
protein structure. J. Mol. Biol.  326:1065-1079. 
 30.  Cai,C.Z., Han,L.Y., Ji,Z.L., Chen,X., and Chen,Y.Z. 2003. SVM-Prot: Web-based support vector machine software 
for functional classification of a protein from its primary sequence. Nucleic Acids Res.  31:3692-3697. 
 31.  Shazman,S., and Mandel-Gutfreund,Y. 2008. Classifyi ng RNA-binding proteins based on electrostatic properties. 
PLoS. Comput. Biol.  4:e1000146. 
 32.  Bairoch,A. 1991. PROSITE: a dictionary of sites and patterns in proteins. Nucleic Acids Res.  19 Suppl :2241-
2245. 
 33.  Bock,J.R., and Gough,D.A. 2001. Predicting protei n--protein interactions from primary structure. Bioinformatics  
17:455-460. 
 34.  Chothia,C. 1992. Proteins. One thou sand families for the molecular biologist. Nature  357:543-544. 
 35.  Simons,K.T., Bonneau,R., Ruczins ki,I., and Baker,D. 1999. Ab initio prot ein structure prediction of CASP III 
targets using ROSETTA. Proteins  Suppl 3 :171-176.  17 36.  Konagurthu,A.S., Whisstock,J.C., Stuckey,P.J., and Lesk,A.M. 2006. MUSTANG:  a multiple structural alignment 
algorithm. Proteins  64:559-574. 
 37.  nett-Lovsey,R.M., Herbert,A.D., Sternberg,M.J ., and Kelley,L.A. 2008. Exploring the extremes of 
sequence/structure space with ensemble fold recognition in the program Phyre. Proteins  70:611-625. 
 38.  Shell,M.S., Ozkan,S.B., Voelz,V., Wu,G.A., and Dill,K.A.  2009. Blind test of physics-b ased prediction of protein 
structures. Biophys. J.  96:917-924. 
 39.  Chen,H., and Skolnick,J. 2008. M-TASSER: an al gorithm for protein quaterna ry structure prediction. Biophys. J.  
94:918-928. 
 40.  Blake,J.D., and Cohen,F.E. 2001. Pairwise  sequence alignment below the twilight zone. J. Mol. Biol.  307:721-
735. 
 41.  Yona,G., and Levitt,M. 2002. Within the twilight z one: a sensitive profile-prof ile comparison tool based on 
information theory. J. Mol. Biol.  315:1257-1275. 
 42.  Van,W., I, Lasters,I., and Wyns,L. 2005. SABmark--a benchmark for sequence alignment that covers the entire 
known fold space. Bioinformatics.  21:1267-1268. 
 43.  Thompson,J.D., Plewniak,F., and Poch,O. 1999. BAli BASE: a benchmark alignment dat abase for the evaluation 
of multiple alignment programs. Bioinformatics.  15:87-88. 
 44.  Murzin,A.G., Brenner,S.E., Hubbard,T., and Chothia,C.  1995. SCOP: a structural classification of proteins 
database for the investigation of sequences and structures. J. Mol. Biol.  247:536-540. 
 45.  Karplus,K., Katzman,S., Shackl eford,G., Koeva,M., Draper,J., Barnes,B., Soriano,M., and Hughey,R. 2005. SAM-
T04: what is new in protein- structure prediction for CASP6. Proteins  61 Suppl 7 :135-142. 
 46.  Jaroszewski,L., Rychlewski,L., Li,Z., Li,W., and Godzik ,A. 2005. FFAS03: a server fo r profile--profile sequence 
alignments. Nucleic Acids Res.  33:W284-W288. 
 47.  Mittelman,D., Sadreyev,R., and Grishin,N. 2003. Probab ilistic scoring measures for profile-profile comparison 
yield more accurate short seed alignments. Bioinformatics  19:1531-1539. 
 48.  Chen,Y.C., and Lim,C. 2008. Predicting RNA-binding si tes from the protein structure based on electrostatics, 
evolution and geometry. Nucleic Acids Res.  36:e29. 
 49.  Chen,Y.C., and Lim,C. 2008. Common physical ba sis of macromolecule-binding sites in proteins. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 36:7078-7087. 
 50.  Kwon,Y., Hofmann,T., and Montell,C. 2007. Integrati on of phosphoinositide- and calmodulin-mediated regulation 
of TRPC6. Mol. Cell  25:491-503. 
 51.  Nilius,B., Mahieu,F., Prenen,J., Janssens,A., Owsian ik,G., Vennekens,R., and Voets,T. 2006. The Ca2+-activated 
cation channel TRPM4 is regulated by  phosphatidylinositol  4,5-biphosphate. EMBO J.  25:467-478. 
 52.  Zhang,H., Craciun,L.C., Mirshahi,T., Rohacs,T., Lope s,C.M., Jin,T., and Logothetis,D.E. 2003. PIP(2) activates 
KCNQ channels, and its hydrolysis underlies receptor-mediated inhibition of M currents. Neuron  37:963-975. 
 
 