arXiv:hep-th/9110037v1  15 Oct 1991SU-ITP-900
February 1, 2008
HARD ART OF THE UNIVERSE CREATION
(Stochastic approach to tunneling and baby universe format ion)
Andrei Linde1
Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford CA 94 305-4060, USA2
ABSTRACT
We develop a stochastic approach to the theory of tunneling w ith
the baby universe formation. This method is applied also to t he
theory of creation of the universe in a laboratory.
1On leave of absence from: Lebedev Physical Institute, Mosco w 117924, USSR
2Bitnet address LINDE@SLACVM
11 Introduction
Few years ago many people believed that the universe is topol ogically con-
nected. Of course, it was possible to speculate about the uni verse consisting
of many disconnected pieces, but such speculations did not s eem to have any
practical consequences since it was assumed that topologic ally disconnected
pieces of the universe cannot inﬂuence each other. However, recently it was
understood that topologically disconnected universes may have a non-local
interaction with each other, which may help us to solve the co smological
constant problem [1]-[9]. The most popular approach to the c osmological
constant problem is based on the possibility that even if one starts with one
(topologically connected) universe, later on many new univ erses (so-called
baby universes) are created from the original one due to quan tum tunneling
[10]-[13]. This idea is very interesting and it may prove to b e very productive.
However, the standard lore of the theory of tunneling with th e universe pro-
duction is based on the Euclidean approach to quantum cosmol ogy [11]-[13].
In some cases this approach gives correct answers and can be j ustiﬁed with
the help of more rigorous methods. In some other cases this ap proach also
gives correct answers, but not to the questions which were as ked originally.
Being applied to the baby universe theory, this method conta ins many ambi-
guities which still remain unresolved [14]. One of the most d iﬃcult problems
is related to the choice of sign of the Euclidean action in the expression for the
wave function of the universe Ψ: Whether Ψ ∼exp(−SE), like the Hartle-
Hawking wave function [15] (or Ψ ∼exp(exp( −SE)), with an account taken
of baby universes [2]), or Ψ ∼exp(SE), like the tunneling wave function [16]
? Or maybe (as we suspect) the true answer is much more complic ated ?
The cosmological constant problem is not the only possible a pplication
of the theory of many topologically disconnected universes . It is not incon-
ceivable that only in this context one can really understand the origin of our
own universe. Indeed, the standard idea that our universe ap peared from
“nothing” (or singularity) is not much better (and conceptu ally is much less
clear) than the idea that it appeared from another universe a s a result of the
baby universe creation. This brings us to another issue whic h was discussed
recently: Is it possible to create the universe in a laborato ry ?
In the context of the standard hot universe theory this quest ion is not
2very interesting . In order to create a large universe which w ould be as long-
living as ours, one would need to have at least as many particl es as their
total number in the observable part of our universe... In the inﬂationary
universe scenario one can do the same job by producing a scala r ﬁeld φwith
the potential energy density V(φ) in a domain of space of a radius rbigger
than the horizon, r > H−1(φ) =/radicalbigg
3M2p
8πV(φ). Such a domain of the inﬂationary
universe expands by its own laws, as a separate universe inde pendent of
what occurs outside it (“no-hair” theorem for de Sitter spac e). The total
energy of the ﬁeld φin a bubble of a radius r∼H−1isE∼M3
p√
V(φ). This
amounts to about a hundred kilograms of matter for the new inﬂ ationary
universe scenario in grand uniﬁed theories and to just a few P lanck masses
Mp∼10−5g for chaotic inﬂation, which may start at extremely large V(φ),
up to V(φ)∼M4
p[14].
This does not mean that it is easy to create an inﬂationary uni verse in a
laboratory, even with the help of chaotic inﬂation. An inves tigation of this
problem shows that at the classical level this process is for bidden; one can
only form small sub-critical bubbles with r < H−1, which never expand up
to the over-critical size r > H−1[19]. However, the over-critical domains can
appear due to quantum eﬀects.
In particular, one may consider a small (sub-critical) bubb le ﬁlled with a
scalar ﬁeld with large V(φ) and investigate a possibility that such a bubble
will transform into a large expanding bubble due to quantum t unneling. This
possibility was considered in a series of very interesting p apers [20, 21] by
two diﬀerent methods. The results of these two methods agree with each
other and the authors conclude that one can actually create t he universe in a
laboratory in this way. However, there exist two problems wi th the methods
used in [20, 21].
Investigation of quantum tunneling with an account taken of gravitational
eﬀects is extremely complicated. To simplify the problem, t he authors of [20,
21] assumed that the bubble contains vacuum in a state φ= 0, corresponding
to a local minimum of the eﬀective potential V(φ), and that the bubble wall
is very thin. The thin wall approximation is valid in the old i nﬂationary
universe scenario, but old inﬂation does not lead to a good co smology. This
approximation is valid also in some inﬂationary models invo lving several
3diﬀerent scalar ﬁelds [22, 23], but the bubble formation in t hese models is
much more complicated, and it was not studied in [20, 21]. Unf ortunately,
we are not aware of any situation where the thin wall approxim ation would
work in the standard versions of new or chaotic inﬂation.
Another problem is related to the possibility to create the i nitial sub-
critical bubble surrounded by the ordinary Minkowski vacuu m. In [20, 21]
it was assumed that this is just a technical problem, which mu st have some
solution. However, it is not quite clear whether such soluti on exists at all.
Indeed, the only way of producing such bubbles which we know a t present
is to heat some part of the universe up to the critical tempera tureTc, af-
ter which the phase transition to the false vacuum occurs in t his domain.
However, in all realistic models studied so far the thermal e nergy density
E∼T4at the time of the phase transition is much bigger than the vac uum
energy density, T4
c≫V(0) [14]. Bubbles ﬁlled (and surrounded) by the gas
of ultrarelativistic particles behave quite diﬀerently fr om the empty bubbles
studied in [20, 21].
The problems discussed above are so complicated that it woul d be very
desirable to ﬁnd some simple intuitive approach which would help us to get
at least partial understanding of what is going on. Few years ago, even before
the notion of the baby universes was introduced, we suggeste d a stochastic
approach to the inﬂationary universe formation due to quant um ﬂuctuations
in Minkowski space and estimated the probability of this pro cess for a large
class of models of the scalar ﬁeld φminimally coupled to gravity [10]. Later
we used a simple generalization of this approach to describe the probabil-
ity of the universe formation in a laboratory (at high temper ature) [17, 18].
Stochastic approach to the universe formation has its own pr oblems, to be
discussed below. However, it is very simple, its results hav e a clear phys-
ical interpretation and, as we will show, it works very well b eing applied
to the theory of tunneling in ﬁeld theory and quantum statist ics, both in
Minkowski space and in de Sitter space. Therefore, this meth od may serve
as a useful intermediate step towards a more complete and rig orous inves-
tigation of the baby universe formation. In this paper we wil l describe the
stochastic approach to tunneling and apply it to the theory o f the baby uni-
verse production, both in the empty Minkowski space and in a l aboratory.
In order to do it we must ﬁrst say few words about Euclidean app roach to
4tunneling and to quantum cosmology.
2 Euclidean Methods in the Theory of Tun-
neling
One of the simplest and most elegant approaches to tunneling in the scalar
ﬁeld theory [24] is the Euclidean one [25]. The main idea of th is approach
is that tunneling is a motion with imaginary energy, which is equivalent
to motion in imaginary time, i.e. in Euclidean space. The pro bability of
tunneling is proportional to exp( −SE), where SEis the Euclidean action
corresponding to the tunneling trajectory. In other words, SEis the instanton
action, where the instanton is the solution of the Euclidean ﬁeld equations
describing tunneling.
A most instructive example is tunneling in a theory with the e ﬀective
potential
V=1
2m2φ2−1
4λφ4+V(0). (1)
The tunneling trajectories (instantons) with the minimal a ction possess
the O(4) symmetry of Euclidean space [25]. The Euclidean equ ation for O(4)
symmetric tunneling is
d2φ/dr2+ (3/r)dφ/dr =V′(φ), (2)
with the boundary conditions φ(r=∞) =φoanddφ/dr|r=0= 0. Here
r=/radicalBig
x2
i; thexiare the Euclidean coordinates, i = 1,2,3,4.
In the theory (1) with m= 0 equation (2) has a class of solutions which
are called Fubini instantons [26]:
φ(r) = 2/radicalBigg
2
λ/parenleftBiggρ
r2+ρ2/parenrightBigg
, (3)
where ρis arbitrary. The corresponding Euclidean action does not d epend
onρ,
SE= 2π2/integraldisplay
r3/parenleftbigg1
2(dφ/dr )2+V(φ)/parenrightbigg
dr=8π2
3λ. (4)
5The bubbles which appear after tunneling are also described by eq. (3) if one
understands by r2its Minkowski counterpart r2−t2. The probability of the
bubble formation per unit four-volume can be estimated by th e expression
P∼ρ−4exp/parenleftBigg
−8π2
3λ/parenrightBigg
(5)
form= 0.
A somewhat surprising fact is that for any nonvanishing mthere are no
instanton solutions in the theory (1). This does not mean, ho wever, that
there is no tunneling in this theory. The point is that for any nonvanishing
mthe minimum of tunneling action corresponds to the ρ→0 limit of the
ﬁeld conﬁgurations (3). But one can easily check that the act ion of these
conﬁgurations diﬀers from its limiting value (4) by ∆ SE≪1 forρ≪√
λ
m,
i.e. for φ≫m/λin the center of the instanton. This means that the Fubini
instantons (3) with ρ≪√
λ
mmay play the role of instantons in the theory (1)
with nonvanishing mas well.
A similar approach can be used to study tunneling at a ﬁnite te mperature.
Quantum statistics at ﬁnite Tis equivalent to quantum ﬁeld theory in the
Euclidean space periodic in the time direction with the peri od 1/T. In the
limiting case T≫mone should look for O(3) symmetric instantons with the
time-independent ﬁeld φand then multiply the three-dimensional action by
1/T[27]. The resulting four-dimensional action for the theory (1) isS∼19m
λT
[28] and the probability of tunneling is given by
P∼exp/parenleftbigg
−19m
λT/parenrightbigg
. (6)
To describe tunneling in the inﬂationary universe by Euclid ean meth-
ods one should take into account that the Euclidean version o f de Sitter
space with the vacuum energy density V(φ) is the sphere S4with the radius
H−1(φ) =/radicalbigg
3M2p
8πV(φ). An instanton solution in this case is a sphere S4contain-
ing a constant scalar ﬁeld φcorresponding to an extremum of the eﬀective
potential V(φ). The corresponding action is negative and is given by
S=−3M4
p
8V(φ). (7)
6Let us assume that the eﬀective potential has a complicated f orm with a
local minimum at φ= 0, a local maximum at φ=φ1, next local minimum at
φ=φ2, next local maximum at φ=φ3, next local minimum at φ=φ4, etc.
Then, according to [29], the probability of tunneling from φ= 0 to φ=φ2is
given by
P= exp ( −S(φ1) +S(0)) = exp/parenleftBigg3M4
p
8/parenleftBig
V−1(φ1)−V−1(0)/parenrightBig/parenrightBigg
.(8)
In particular, for the theory (1) with m≪√
V /M p
P= exp/parenleftBigg
−3M4
pm4
32λV2(0)/parenrightBigg
. (9)
Euclidean approach to tunneling in Minkowski space at T= 0 can be jus-
tiﬁed by the standard Hamiltonian methods. Euclidean metho ds at T/negationslash= 0
give a correct expression for the exponential suppression o f the probabil-
ity of tunneling, but some care should be taken when one calcu lates sub-
exponential terms. The situation with tunneling in de Sitte r space is much
more confusing:
i) From the derivation of eq. (8) given in [29] and from all sub sequent
“proofs” of this equation with the help of Euclidean methods by other authors
it was not clear why one should write S(φ1) in eq. (8) rather than, say, S(φ2)
orS(φ3). Indeed, the instantons discussed in [29] describe de Sitt er space
ﬁlled by a homogeneous scalar ﬁeld which may correspond to anyextremum
ofV(φ).
ii) According to its derivation, eq. (8) should work equally well for H > m
and for H < m since the instantons used for its derivation exist independ ently
of the value of m. However, stochastic methods to be used in the next section
show that eq. (8) is valid only if V′′(φ)≫H2all the way from φ0toφ1.
iii) The instanton solution obtained in [29] describes a hom ogeneous ﬁeld
φrather than a bubble. Therefore eq. (8) was interpreted orig inally as an ex-
pression for the probability of tunneling which occurred si multaneously in the
whole universe. This interpretation proved to be incorrect [30]. Another in-
terpretation [31] was that eq. (8) described appearance of l arge bubbles with
7an interior which looked homogeneous on a scale l > H−1. Unfortunately,
it remained unclear how solutions with a constant ﬁeld φcould describe the
process of an inhomogeneous tunneling with bubble formatio n.
It took few years to prove that eq. (8) and its interpretation in [31] were
actually correct, but only under some conditions which did n ot follow from
its Euclidean derivation. The proof was given within the sto chastic approach
to tunneling [32, 30], which we will discuss now.
3 Stochastic Approach to Tunneling
The main idea of the stochastic approach can be illustrated o n an example
of tunneling in the theory (1) with m= 0 in Minkowski space. Equation of
motion for the bubble in Minkowski space is
¨φ=d2φ/dr2+ (2/r)dφ/dr−V′(φ). (10)
At the moment of its formation, the bubble wall does not move. Then it
starts growing if ¨φ >0, which requires that
|d2φ/dr2+ (2/r)dφ/dr|<−V′(φ). (11)
A bubble of a classical ﬁeld is formed only if it contains a suﬃ ciently big ﬁeld
φ(it should be over the barrier, so that dV/dφ < 0) and if the bubble itself
is suﬃciently large. If the size of the bubble is too small, th e gradient terms
are bigger than the term |V′(φ)|, and the ﬁeld φinside the bubble does not
grow. Typically, the second term in (11) somewhat compensat es the ﬁrst
one. To make a very rough estimate, one may write the conditio n (11) in the
form
1
2r−2∼1
2k2<1
2k2
max∼φ−1|V′|=λφ2=1
3m2(φ)≡1
3V′′(φ). (12)
Let us estimate the probability of an event when vacuum ﬂuctu ations occa-
sionally build up a conﬁguration of the ﬁeld satisfying this condition. In order
to do it one should remember that the dispersion of quantum ﬂu ctuations of
the ﬁeld φwithk < k maxis given by
< φ2>k<k max=1
4π2/integraldisplaykmax
0k2dk√
k2+m2. (13)
8For the massless ﬁeld k2
max= 2C2λφ2, where the factor C2=O(1) reﬂects
some uncertainty in our estimate of the value of k2
max. This gives
< φ2>k<k max=1
4π2/integraldisplaykmax
0kdk=k2
max
8π2=C2λφ2
8π2. (14)
This is an estimate of the dispersion of perturbations which may sum
up to produce a ﬁeld φwhich satisﬁes the condition (12). Of course, this
estimate is rather crude. But let us nevertheless use eq. (14 ) to evaluate the
probability that these ﬂuctuations build up a bubble of the ﬁ eldφof a radius
r > k−1
max. This can be done with the help of the Gaussian distribution:
P(φ)∼exp(−φ2
2< φ2>k<k max) = exp( −2π2
C2λ). (15)
Note that the factor in the exponent in (15) to within a factor ofC2= 3/4
coincides with the Euclidean action SEin eq. (4). Taking into account the
very rough method we used to calculate the dispersion of the p erturbations
responsible for tunneling, the coincidence is rather impre ssive.
This method also helps to study tunneling in the theory (1) wi thm/negationslash= 0,
in which the instanton solutions do not exist. Indeed, a gene ralization of the
previous calculation for this case gives the following resu lt for the tunneling
probability:
P(φ)∼= exp/parenleftBigg
−2π2
C2λ/parenleftBigg
1 +O(m2
λφ2)/parenrightBigg/parenrightBigg
. (16)
This means that tunneling is possible for m/negationslash= 0. There is an additional
exponential suppression of the probability of tunneling in this theory as com-
pared with (15). However, this additional suppression disa ppears if tunneling
occurs by formation of bubbles with φ > m/λ . This is in an agreement with
our arguments given in the previous section. For a discussio n of other aspects
of tunneling in the theory (1) within the stochastic approac h see also [33, 34].
The agreement between the results of the method discussed ab ove and
a more complicated Euclidean approach becomes even more imp ressive if
one remembers that most of the results obtained in the tunnel ing theory by
Euclidean methods [14] can easily be reproduced (with an acc uracy of the
coeﬃcients of O(1) in the exponent) by this simple method.
9For example, let us consider the theory (1) at a temperature T≫m. In
this case
< φ2>k<k max=1
2π2/integraldisplaykmax
0k2dk
√
k2+m2/parenleftbigg
exp√
k2+m2(φ)
T−1/parenrightbigg∼T
2π2/integraldisplaykmax
0k2dk
k2+m2.
(17)
Note that the ﬁeld inside the bubble should be somewhat bigge r than 2 m/√
λ
since otherwise V(φ)> V(0) and the phase transition is energetically impos-
sible. At φ >2m/√
λthe main contribution to V′is given by −λφ3and the
expression for kmaxis the same as in the previous example, k2
max= 2C2λφ2>
m2. This gives
P(φ)∼exp/parenleftBigg
−π2φ
CT√
2λ/parenrightBigg
. (18)
The probability increases with a decrease of φ, butφshould remain bigger
than 2 m/√
λ. To make a ﬁnal estimate, let us take φ∼3m/√
λ. The result
is
P(φ)∼exp/parenleftBigg
−3π2m
CT√
2λ/parenrightBigg
. (19)
This coincides with the result of the Euclidean approach (6) forC=3π2
19√
2∼
1.1.
Similar methods can be applied to tunneling in the inﬂationa ry universe.
There are some diﬀerences though. First of all, the total ene rgy of the bubble
grows exponentially during inﬂation. In other words, the to tal energy of the
scalar ﬁeld inside the bubble is not conserved and there is no restriction
V(φ)> V(0) mentioned above. Moreover, there is no need for the new ph ase
to be energetically favorable for the exponentially large b ubbles of the new
phase to appear. It is suﬃcient for the radius of the bubble to be bigger
thanH−1and for the homogeneous ﬁeldφinside it to be stable with respect
to rolling back to φ= 0. In other words, one should not worry about the
bubble walls moving towards the center of the bubble until it disappears.
Indeed, if the bubble walls originally are displaced at a dis tance r > H−1
from the center of the bubble, this distance later grows with a speed greater
than the speed of light due to the exponential expansion of th e universe.
Therefore, the local motion of the walls towards the center c annot lead to
a disappearance of the bubble with an initial size r > H−1. This means
10that for tunneling to occur it is suﬃcient if the bubble of a ra diusr > H−1
is formed containing any ﬁeld φ > φ 1, where φ1corresponds to the nearby
maximum of V(φ).
Calculation of < φ2>k<Hduring inﬂation is rather complicated. Fortu-
nately, for the theory with the eﬀective potential V(φ) =m2
2φ2+V(0) the
result is well known [35, 36],
< φ2>k<H=3H4
8π2m2, (20)
where H2=8πV(0)
3M2p. According to (15), this gives the following estimate of
the probability of formation of a bubble of a ﬁeld φ≥φ1=m/√
λof a radius
r > H−1(i.e. of the probability of tunneling):
P= exp/parenleftBigg
−3M4
pm4
16λV2(0)/parenrightBigg
. (21)
This agrees, up to the coeﬃcient 2 in the exponent, with the Eu clidean
result (9). The agreement becomes complete if one investiga tes the probabil-
ity distribution in a more detailed way, without approximat ingV(φ) by its
quadratic part.
The wave-lengths of all vacuum ﬂuctuations of the scalar ﬁel dφgrow
exponentially in the expanding universe. When the waveleng th of any par-
ticular ﬂuctuation becomes greater than H−1, this ﬂuctuation stops prop-
agating, and its amplitude freezes at some nonzero value δφ(x) because of
the large friction term 3 H˙φin the equation of motion of the ﬁeld φ. The
amplitude of this ﬂuctuation then remains almost unchanged for a very long
time, whereas its wavelength grows exponentially. Therefo re, the appearance
of such a frozen ﬂuctuation is equivalent to the appearance o f a classical ﬁeld
δφ(x) that does not vanish after averaging over macroscopic inte rvals of space
and time. The average amplitude of the frozen ﬁeld generated during a typ-
ical time H−1is given by δφ(x) =H/2π[36]. This ﬁeld looks constant on a
scaleH−1, but on a bigger scale it is inhomogeneous. If one is interest ed in
the value of this ﬁeld in each particular point, one should ta ke into account
that each new wave is frozen with a diﬀerent phase. As a result , the ﬁeld φ
in each particular point moves as a Brownian particle. This m akes it possible
11to write a diﬀusion equation for the probability distributi on to ﬁnd a ﬁeld φ
with the wavelength bigger than H−1in a given point at a given time [32]:
∂P
∂t=∂
∂φ/parenleftBigg∂(DP)
∂φ+P
3H∂V
∂φ/parenrightBigg
. (22)
Here the coeﬃcient of diﬀusion Dis given by H3/8π2. If the probability of
tunneling is suﬃciently small, then the distribution Pwith a good accuracy
is given by the stationary solution of eq. (22),
P∼exp/parenleftBigg3M4
p
8V(φ)/parenrightBigg
, (23)
To describe tunneling from the point φ= 0 over the barrier at φ1one should
consider the probability of formation of a bubble of a ﬁeld φ≥φ1of a radius
r > H−1,
P∼exp/parenleftBigg3M4
p
8/parenleftBig
V−1(φ1)−V−1(0)/parenrightBig/parenrightBigg
, (24)
where the last term is necessary for normalization of the pro bability dis-
tribution. This coincides with the Euclidean result (8). Ho wever, now we
have a clear interpretation of this result. (For a more detai led discussion see
[32, 30, 14].) We can also understand the limits of its validi ty. Namely, eq.
(22) is valid only during inﬂation and only if V′′≪H2in the interval from
φ= 0 to φ=φ1. This condition does not follow at all from the derivation of
eq. (8) in the Euclidean approach.
This comment proves to be very important in the context of qua ntum cos-
mology. Indeed, the stationary solution (23) looks as a squa re of the Hartle-
Hawking wave function of the ground state of the universe [15 ] obtained by
Euclidean methods. Therefore one could consider eq. (23) as a conﬁrmation
of the validity of the Hartle-Hawking wave function, which w as criticized in
[16]. However, in all realistic theories the condition V′′≪H2of validity of
eqs. (22), (23) is not satisﬁed near the absolute minimum of V(φ). As a
result, all solutions of eq. (22) in realistic theories are n on-stationary. The
probability distribution (23) can be used at intermediate s tages of inﬂation
for an approximate description of tunneling, when the proba bility distribu-
tion is quasi-stationary, but it does not have any fundament al signiﬁcance
and cannot be used to describe the universe as a whole.
12An important physical consequence of the Brownian motion of the ﬁeld
φduring inﬂation is the self-reproduction of the inﬂationar y universe. This
process is especially interesting in the context of chaotic inﬂation [37, 14].
It proves that at large φthe Brownian motion is much more rapid than the
classical rolling of the ﬁeld to the minimum of its potential energy density. As
a result, many inﬂationary domains are formed which contain growing ﬁeld
φ. These domains expand much faster than the domains with smal lφ. This
leads to a paradoxical situation where the main part of the ph ysical volume
of the universe (in the synchronous coordinate system) beco mes occupied
not by the ﬁeld corresponding to the minimum of V(φ), but by the ﬁeld
ﬂuctuating at a density close to the Planck energy density M4
p[37, 14]. It is
quite clear that if the process of the baby universe formatio n can occur at
all, inﬂationary domains with V(φ)∼M4
pare the best place for it. We will
return to this question in the end of the paper.
4 Stochastic Approach to the Baby Universe
Formation
Now that we demonstrated usefulness and reliability of the s tochastic ap-
proach in many diﬀerent situations where it can be conﬁrmed b y other meth-
ods, we will take a deep breath and try to apply it to the invest igation of
the possibility of creating an inﬂationary universe from Mi nkowski space
[10, 17, 18]. The issue here is that quantum ﬂuctuations in Mi nkowski space
can bring into being an inﬂationary domain of a radius r > H−1(φ), where
φis a scalar ﬁeld produced by quantum ﬂuctuations in this doma in. The
“no-hair” theorem for de Sitter space implies that such a dom ain inﬂates in
an entirely self-contained manner, independent of what occ urs in the sur-
rounding space. We could then conceive of a ceaseless proces s of creation
of inﬂationary mini-universes that could take place even at the very latest
stages of development of the part of the universe that surrou nds us.
Without pretending to provide a complete description of suc h a process,
let us attempt to estimate its probability in theories with V(φ) =λφn
nMpn−4
using the methods elaborated in the previous section. A doma in formed
with a large ﬁeld φcan behave as a part of inﬂationary universe only if
13φ>∼Mpand the gradient and kinetic energy of this ﬁeld 1 /over2(∂µφ)2is
smaller than V(φ) in its interior. The last condition implies that the size of
the domain must exceed r∼φV−1/2(φ). Such a domain could arise through
the build-up of quantum ﬂuctuations δφwith a wavelength
r∼k−1≥k−1
max∼φV−1/2(φ)∼m−1(φ). (25)
(Note that m−1(φ)> H−1(φ) during inﬂation.) One can estimate the dis-
persion < φ2>k<mof such ﬂuctuations using the simple formula
< φ2>k<m∼1
4π2/integraldisplaykmax
0kdk∼m2
π2∼V(φ)
8π2φ2, (26)
and for a Gaussian distribution P(φ) for the appearance of a ﬁeld φwhich is
suﬃciently homogeneous on a scale r > m−1(φ), one has [10]
P(φ)∼exp(−φ2
2< φ2>k<m)∼exp(−Cπ2φ4
V(φ)), (27)
where C = O(1). In particular, for a theory with V(φ) =λ
4φ4,
P(φ)∼exp(−C4π2
λ). (28)
Note, that eq. (28) does not show any suppression of the proba bility of the
baby universe formation due to smallness of gravitational e ﬀects; P(φ) may
be quite large in the theory with a large coupling constant λ.3Some suppres-
sion may appear at the sub-exponential level, since the “pha se space” of all
possible inﬂationary universes in this theory is constrain ed by the condition
φ > M p.
The probability of the baby universe formation in the theory of a massive
scalar ﬁeld can be estimated by
P(φ)∼exp(−C8π2φ2
m2). (29)
3One should remember that in a theory of several scalar ﬁelds w ith diﬀerent coupling
constants the probability of creation of an inﬂationary uni verse is given by the largest
coupling constant, whereas the density perturbations δρ/ρis determined by the smallest
coupling constant λ[14].
14The leading contribution is given by the universes with the s mallest φcom-
patible with inﬂation in this model, φ∼Mp:
P(φ)∼exp(−C8π2M2
p
m2). (30)
This means that the baby universe formation should be very eﬃ cient in the
theories in which the heaviest scalar particles have masses comparable with
Mp.
The main objection to the possibility of quantum creation of an inﬂation-
ary universe in Minkowski space is that the energy conservat ion forbids the
production of an object with positive energy out of vacuum wi th vanishing
energy density.4Within the scope of the classical ﬁeld theory, in which the
energy density is everywhere positive, such a process would therefore be im-
possible. But at the quantum level, the energy density of the vacuum is zero
by virtue of the cancellation between the positive energy de nsity of classical
scalar ﬁelds, along with their quantum ﬂuctuations, and the negative energy
density associated with quantum ﬂuctuations of fermions, o r the bare nega-
tive energy of the vacuum. The creation of a positive energy- density domain
through the build-up of long-wave ﬂuctuations of the ﬁeld φis inevitably
accompanied by formation of a region surrounding that domai n in which
the long-wave ﬂuctuations of the ﬁeld φare suppressed, and the vacuum en-
ergy density is consequently negative. Here we are dealing w ith the familiar
quantum ﬂuctuations of the vacuum energy density about its z ero point.
It is important that from the point of view of an external obse rver, the
total energy of the inﬂationary region of the universe (and i ndeed the to-
tal energy of the closed inﬂationary universe) does not grow exponentially;
the region that emerges forms a universe distinct from ours, to which it is
joined only by a connecting throat (wormhole). The shortfal l of long-wave
ﬂuctuations of the ﬁeld φsurrounding the inﬂationary domain is quickly re-
plenished by ﬂuctuations arriving from neighboring region s, so the negative
energy of the region near the throat can be be rapidly spread o ver a large
volume around the inﬂationary domain. In such a scenario the total energy of
the inﬂationary domain plus the energy of vacuum surroundin g it will remain
4This problem will not appear when we will study the process of the universe formation
at large temperature.
15zero, but after the negative energy of vacuum surrounding th e inﬂationary do-
main will be distributed all over the rest of the universe an o bserver near the
inﬂationary domain would see it as an evaporating black hole . To show that
this is a viable possibility one can make a naive estimate of t he Schwarzschild
radius of the inﬂationary domain from the point of view of an e xternal ob-
server. The total energy of matter inside this domain is E∼V(φ)m−3(φ).
If one neglects the gravitational defect of mass (this is the place where the
estimate is naive), then the Schwarzschild mass of this doma in is equal to E
and the Schwarzschild radius is E/M2
p∼m−1·H2/m2≫m−1. Thus, the
Schwarzschild radius of the inﬂationary domain is much bigg er than the size
of the domain r∼m−1, so it really looks like a black hole. One can show also
that the time of evaporation of such a black hole is microscop ically small,
but it is much bigger than m−1(φ). For example, it can be shown that in the
theoryλ
4φ4the time of the black hole evaporation is of the order
t∼φ3
λ3/2M4p>(λm(φ))−1. (31)
This means that for a very distant observer all what happens w ill look as
a kind of an unusual long-living quantum ﬂuctuation, an obse rver at a not
too big distance from the inﬂationary domain will see it as an evaporating
black hole surrounded by space with negative vacuum energy, whereas an
observer inside the inﬂationary domain would believe that h e lives inside an
inﬂationary universe.
Since the universes created in the empty space do not carry an y momen-
tum, the process of their formation cannot be localized at an y particular
point. Their main role in the theory is the same as the role of t he baby
universes considered in [2] – [8]: They modify the propertie s of the vacuum
state. However, the methods discussed in this section can be easily extended
for the investigation of the process of formation of inﬂatio nary universes in
a laboratory, where this process can be localized. For examp le, one can
consider the process of production of inﬂationary bubbles i nside a domain
containing matter heated up to a temperature T. To this end on e should
just replace expression (26) for < φ2>k<k maxin eq. (27) by its counterpart
calculated at a temperature T≫m(φ)∼V1/2/φ:
< φ2>k<k max∼TV1/2(φ)
2π2φ. (32)
16Note, that this expression for T≫V1/2/φis much larger than its empty
space predecessor (26). This means (not unexpectedly) that heating leads
to a more eﬃcient creation of universes with a given φ, and this process
is localized in the part of the universe with a large temperat ure (i.e. in a
laboratory). The corresponding probability is given by
PT(φ)∼exp/parenleftBigg
−φ2
2< φ2>k<m/parenrightBigg
∼exp/parenleftBigg
−Cπ2φ3
TV1/2(φ)/parenrightBigg
. (33)
For the theoryλ
4φ4the maximum contribution is given by φ∼Mp,
PT∼exp/parenleftBigg
−Cπ2Mp
T√
λ/parenrightBigg
, (34)
whereas for the theorym2φ2
2the result is
PT∼exp/parenleftBigg
−Cπ2M2
p
Tm/parenrightBigg
. (35)
These expressions remain exponentially small at T≪Mp, for all values of
λandm. Moreover, even if one could rise the temperature up to Mp, one
would not produce inﬂationary universes that way. Eqs. (33) -(35) are valid
only if T4<∼V(φ), since otherwise the energy density of hot matter inside
the bubble is bigger than the eﬀective potential, and inﬂati onary regime
cannot be realized. (This is the same problem as the one discu ssed in the
Introduction in relation to papers [20, 21].) Therefore, th e probability of
creation of inﬂationary universe due to high-temperature e ﬀects in the theory
λ
4φ4is bounded from above by
Pmax(φ)∼exp/parenleftBigg
−Cπ2φ3
V3/4(φ)/parenrightBigg
∼exp/parenleftBigg
−Cπ2
λ3/4/parenrightBigg
. (36)
This maximum is reached at T∼λ1/4Mp. The corresponding expression in
the theorym2φ2
2is
Pmax(φ)∼exp/parenleftBigg
−Cπ2/parenleftbiggMp
m/parenrightbigg3/2/parenrightBigg
, (37)
17This maximum is achieved at T∼/radicalBig
mM p.
One could hope that it might be easier to create the universe i n the new
inﬂationary scenario, since inﬂation occurs there on a much smaller energy
scale. Unfortunately, the result is quite opposite: The sma ller is the energy
density, the larger is H−1, the larger is the size of the domain to be produced,
the smaller is the probability of such event. As an example, w e will consider
here the theory with the eﬀective potential often used in the new inﬂationary
universe scenario,
V(φ) =λφ4/parenleftBigg
logφ
φ0−1
4/parenrightBigg
+V(0). (38)
HereV(0) = λφ4
0/4,φ0is the position of the minimum of V(φ), the mass of
the ﬁeld in this minimum is equal to m= 2√
λφ0. Inﬂationary domain should
contain the ﬁeld φ≪φ0. This means that the deviation from the minimum
due to quantum ﬂuctuations is given by φ0. The size of the domain should
exceed H−1=Mp
φ2
0/radicalBig
3
2πλ. It should be even larger for tunneling to small φ,
withV′′≪H2, but here we will consider the simplest case when V′′is just
few times smaller than H2. Note, that m≫Hforφo≪Mp. In this case
< φ2>k<H∼1
4π2/integraldisplayH
0k2dk√
k2+m2∼H3
12π2m. (39)
This gives the following estimate of the probability of the b aby universe
creation in this theory:
P∼exp(−φ2
0
2< φ2>k<H)∼exp
−C4π2
λ·/parenleftBiggMp
φ0/parenrightBigg3
. (40)
This is much smaller than the corresponding probability in t he chaotic inﬂa-
tion scenario (28).
By a similar method one can get the following estimate of the p robability
to create the universe in a laboratory at T≫m:
PT∼exp
−C2π2φ0
T√
λ·/parenleftBiggMp
φ0/parenrightBigg3
. (41)
18From the condition T4< V(0) = λφ4
0it follows that
PT<exp
−Cπ2
λ3/4·/parenleftBiggMp
φ0/parenrightBigg3
. (42)
Again, for φ0≪Mpthis probability is much smaller than that in the chaotic
inﬂation scenario, see eq. (36).
Thus, we see that the stochastic methods, which proved to be v ery eﬃcient
in the theory of tunneling, may help us to understand such iss ues as the baby
universe formation in the vacuum and at a ﬁnite temperature. However,
several problems are to be resolved before one gets too excit ed.
First of all, our estimates give us the probability of format ion of a large
domain with the energy density dominated by the potential en ergy density
of the slowly changing ﬁeld φ. Such a domain should behave as a part of de
Sitter space. However, if it can be considered as a part of a closed de Sitter
space, then in the beginning it may be rapidly contracting. C ontraction may
lead to appearance of large gradients of the ﬁeld φand to the collapse of the
domain, instead of its exponential expansion.
Even though this problem is very complicated, we believe tha t it does
not cause any diﬃculties in the case when the size of the bubbl e is much
bigger than H−1. Indeed, the acceleration of test particles in de Sitter spa ce
is always large and positive , ¨r/r=H2. One may expect that the bubble walls
at the moment of its formation, being formed by overlapping o f long-wave
quantum ﬂuctuations in Minkowski space, cannot move toward s the center of
the bubble with the speed bigger than the speed of light.5If this is true, then
the bubble of de Sitter space of a size exceeding H−1becomes exponentially
expanding within a fraction of the Hubble time H−1due to the acceleration
¨r/r=H2mentioned above.
The second problem can be explained as follows. When we studi ed for-
mation of an inﬂationary bubble, we did not take into account the backre-
action of the changing metric inside the bubble on the spectr um of vacuum
5In the standard tunneling theory in Minkowski space the init ial speed of the bubble
walls is equal to zero, whereas the bubbles formed in the inﬂa tionary universe may expand
(but not contract) from the very beginning.
19ﬂuctuations during the process of the bubble formation. Thi s is a good ap-
proximation for small bubbles with a radius r < H−1, but for large bubbles
the situation is not that simple. Let us try to visualize the p rocess of growth
of the ﬁeld φin Minkowski space due to overlapping of many long-wave
ﬂuctuations. The wavelength of each such wave should exceed O(m−1(φ)).
Therefore one may expect that the total time necessary for th e maxima of
these waves to overlap should be also of the order of m−1(φ)≫H−1. If the
bubble will start expanding exponentially at any stage of th is process, then
its expansion during the time O(m−1)≫H−1may push away all new in-
coming long-wave ﬂuctuations of the scalar ﬁeld which could lead to further
growth of the ﬁeld inside the bubble. This may make the proces s of direct
formation of inﬂationary baby universes with m−1(φ)≫H−1by the mecha-
nism suggested above either strongly suppressed or even ent irely forbidden.
In the last case, the estimates we made could be only used to ca lculate the
probability of formation of small, sub-critical bubbles wi th the energy den-
sity dominated by V(φ). (As we emphasized in the Introduction, this is an
important problem by itself.) Then it will be necessary to co nsider further
tunneling of a sub-critical bubble to a large exponentially expanding bubble
along the lines of [20, 21], but without the use of the thin-wa ll approxima-
tion. One may expect that the probability of such a double tun neling will be
even smaller than the probability of each of such events sepa rately. In such
case one may use our estimates as an upper bound on the probabi lity of the
baby universe formation.
However, this problem should not be exagerrated. First of al l, this prob-
lem may not appear at all for the bubbles containing the ﬁeld φ∼Mpwith
m−1(φ) being just few times larger than H−1. This is quite suﬃcient for a
production of the universe of our type with a size l >1028cm [14]. Moreover,
inﬂation of the interior of the bubble can push away incoming long-wave per-
turbations only if inﬂation there already started . But in this case inﬂation
itself produces long-wave perturbations by stretching the short-wave ones,
which always exist in the interior of the bubble. This is the s ame mechanism
which leads to appearance of extremely large long-wave pert urbations in the
inﬂationary universe, eq. (20). Indeed, it is known that the total contribu-
tion to < φ2>in de Sitter space from perturbations with the wavelength
smaller than H−1is the same as in Minkowski space, and the contribution of
long-wave perturbations with the wavelength larger than H−1is even greater
20than in Minkowski space, due to the process of stretching of t he wavelengths
mentioned above. This suggests that our estimate for the pro bability of bub-
ble formation with φ∼Mp,m−1(φ)∼H−1has a good chance to be correct,
whereas the probability of the universe formation with m−1(φ)∼H−1may
be even somewhat higher than we expected.
5 Discussion
It is quite clear that the estimates which were obtained by th e stochastic
approach to tunneling cannot serve as a substitute of a compl ete investigation
by more regular methods; a much more detailed investigation is needed to
prove that the process of the baby universe formation can act ually occur
either in the empty Minkowski space or in a laboratory. Howev er, the use
of Euclidean methods in quantum cosmology never have been ju stiﬁed and
often give ambiguous results, whereas the Hamiltonian appr oach usually is
extremely complicated and may have its own conceptual limit ations being
applied to a system of many universes with diﬀerent “times”. Therefore, it
would be very useful in the beginning to get at least partial u nderstanding
of the processes we are going to study. This was the main goal o f the present
investigation.
Our estimates indicate that the process of the baby universe formation
in Minkowski space is actually possible. Moreover, in the th eories with large
coupling constants or with scalar particles with masses of t he order of Mp
this process may be even quite probable. This process by itse lf does not
lead to any spectacular events like formation of a large hole in the ground.
However, as it was argued in [2] – [8], baby universe formatio n may lead to
important modiﬁcations of the properties of our vacuum stat e.
One should note also, that in the eternally existing self-re producing in-
ﬂationary universe this process may occur even at the presen t time in those
domains of the universe which are now in the inﬂationary phas e at a density
close to the Planck density [37, 14]. Quantum jumps of the sca lar ﬁeld to
the Planck density space-time foam, which regularly occur i n this scenario,
and subsequent jumps of the ﬁeld back from the space-time foa m may be in-
terpreted as a process of creation of new inﬂationary univer ses which are not
21attached to our universe by any regions of classical space-t ime. Of course,
one may argue that the distance from us to the inﬂationary dom ains with
the Planck density is exponentially large. Moreover, these regions may form
huge black holes and become eﬀectively disconnected from ou r part of the
universe [38]. One should remember, however, that in the end we are going
to investigate a non-local interaction of baby universes with our universe. It
is important that the main part of the physical volume of a self-reproducing
inﬂationary universe (in the synchronous coordinate syste m) is always oc-
cupied by the ﬂuctuating scalar ﬁeld with V(φ)∼M4
p[37, 14]. Moreover,
it is clear that if the process of the baby universe formation may occur at
all, it should be most eﬃcient at the density close to the Plan ck density.
This suggests (see also [39, 40]) that an investigation of th e baby universe
formation during inﬂation may be very important for the unde rstanding of
the properties of the gravitational vacuum.
The possibility that our own universe could appear as a resul t of decou-
pling from another universe may have other interesting impl ications, some
of which may be experimentally testable. For example, if our universe was
created “from nothing”, then it typically appears in a state with a very large
vacuum energy density, V(φ)∼M4
p[16], and later it enters an inﬁnite pro-
cess of self-reproduction [37]. In such case it does not seem possible to avoid
the standard prediction of inﬂationary cosmology, Ω = 1. How ever, if our
universe is created due to decoupling from another universe , then from our
estimates of P(φ) it follows that in some theories the universe should be
typically created in a state with a small value of V(φ), which only leads to
a very short stage of inﬂation, if any.6In such case our universe may be
relatively small, and it may have Ω /negationslash= 1. We do not think that this model is
natural, but it is better to know that such a possibility may e xist. We men-
tioned it here, since it illustrates a novel way to solve the h omogeneity and
isotropy problem without much help of inﬂation: It is well kn own that only
spherically symmetric bubbles are formed if the probabilit y of their creation
is strongly suppressed.
6This issue is not very trivial, since the expectation value o f thevolume of the inﬂa-
tionary universe in the theories with V(φ)∼φn(without an account taken of its self-
reproduction at very large φ) is proportional to P(φ)exp/parenleftBig
12πφ2
nM2
p/parenrightBig
[14], which may grow
at large φeven if P(φ) decreases.
22As for the possibility to create the universe in a laboratory , our estimates
indicate that one would need a very good laboratory indeed. T he probability
to create the universe in a laboratory is not totally negligi ble only in the
chaotic inﬂation scenario, only in the theories with large c oupling constants
or with scalar particles with masses of the order of Mp, and only if one can
heat the system up to the temperature approaching Mp. However, the most
ironical part of it is the question whether the new universe c an be useful for
us in any way. Of course, one may just consider the problem of t he universe
creation as an interesting theoretical problem to think abo ut in a spare time,
but if the universe creation is entirely useless, one may ﬁnd other interesting
problems to solve. Leaving aside the possibility to use the u niverse as a
universal trash compactor, we were hardly able to ﬁnd any goo d reason to
spend our time and energy for its creation.
Indeed, one cannot “pump” energy from the new universe to our s, since
this would contradict the energy conservation law. One cann ot jump into
the new universe, since at the moment of its creation it is mic roscopically
small and extremely dense, and later it decouples from our un iverse. One
even cannot send any information about himself to those peop le who will
live in the new universe. If one tries, so to say, to write down something “on
the surface of the universe”, then, for the billions of billi ons years to come,
the inhabitants of the new universe will live in a corner of on e letter. This
is a consequence of a general rule: All local properties of th e universe after
inﬂation do not depend on initial conditions at the moment of its formation.
Very soon it becomes absolutely ﬂat, homogeneous and isotro pic, and any
original message “imprinted” on the universe becomes unrea dable.
We were able to ﬁnd only one exception to this rule. As we alrea dy
mentioned, if chaotic inﬂation starts at a suﬃciently large energy density,
then it goes forever, creating new and new inﬂationary domai ns. These
domains contain matter in all possible “phase states” (or va cuum states),
corresponding to all possible minima of the eﬀective potent ial and all types
of compactiﬁcation compatible with inﬂation [37, 14]. Howe ver, if inﬂation
starts at a suﬃciently low energy density, as is often the cas e with the uni-
verses produced in a laboratory, then no such diversiﬁcatio n occurs; inﬂation
at a relatively small energy density does not change the symm etry breaking
pattern of the theory and the way of compactiﬁcation of space -time. There-
23fore it seems that the only way to send a message to those who wi ll live in
the universe we are planning to create is to encrypt it into th e properties
of the vacuum state of the new universe, i.e. to the laws of the low-energy
physics. Hopefully, one may achieve it by choosing a proper c ombination of
temperature, pressure and external ﬁelds, which would lead to creation of
the universe in a desirable phase state.
The corresponding message can be long and informative enoug h only if
there are extremely many ways of symmetry breaking and/or pa tterns of
compactiﬁcation in the underlying theory. This is exactly t he case, e.g.,
in the superstring theory, which was considered for a long ti me as one of
the main problems of this theory. Another requirement to the informative
message is that it should not be too simple. If, for example, m asses of all
particles would be equal to each other, all coupling constan ts would be given
by 1, etc., the corresponding message would be too short. Per haps, one may
say quite a lot by creating a universe in a strange vacuum stat e with mp∼
2000me,mW∼100mp,mX∼1013mW,Mp∼104mX. The stronger is the
symmetry breaking, the more “unnatural” are relations betw een parameters
of the theory after it, the more information the message may c ontain. Is
it the reason why we must work so hard to understand strange fe atures of
our beautiful and imperfect world? Does this mean that our un iverse was
created not by a divine design but by a physicist hacker? If it is true, then
our results indicate that he did a very diﬃcult job. Hopefull y, he did not
make too many mistakes...
6 Acknowledgements
It is a pleasure to thank T. Banks, S. Coleman, A. Guth, J. Elli s, S. Hawking,
M. Miji´ c, M. Sher and L. Susskind for valuable discussions a t diﬀerent stages
of this investigation. This work was supported in part by NSF grant PHY-
8612280.
24References
[1] A.D. Linde, Phys. Lett. B200 (1988) 272.
[2] S. Coleman, Nucl. Phys. B307 (1988) 867.
[3] T. Banks, Nucl. Phys. B309 (1988) 493.
[4] S. Giddings and A. Strominger, Nucl. Phys. B307 (1988) 854.
[5] S. Coleman, Nucl. Phys. B310 (1989) 643.
[6] S. Giddings and A. Strominger, Nucl. Phys. B321 (1989) 481.
[7] G.V. Lavrelashvili, V.A. Rubakov and P.G. Tinyakov, Mod . Phys. Lett.
A3(1988) 1231;
V.A. Rubakov and P.G. Tinyakov, Phys. Lett. 214B (1988) 334.
[8] I. Klebanov, L. Susskind and T. Banks, Nucl. Phys. B317 (1989) 665.
[9] A.D. Linde, Phys. Lett. B227 (1989) 352.
[10] A.S. Goncharov, A.D. Linde and V.F. Mukhanov, Int. J. Mo d. Phys.
A2(1987) 561.
[11] S.W. Hawking, Phys. Lett. B195 (1987) 277; Phys. Rev. D37(1988)
904.
[12] G.V. Lavrelashvili, V.A. Rubakov and P.G. Tinyakov, JE TP Lett. 46
(1987) 167; Nucl. Phys. B299 (1988) 757.
[13] S.B. Giddings and A. Strominger, Nucl. Phys. B306 (1988) 890.
[14] A.D. Linde, Particle Physics and Inﬂationary Cosmology (Har-
wood, New York, 1990).
[15] J.B. Hartle and S.W. Hawking, Phys. Rev. D28(1983) 2960.
[16] A.D. Linde, JETP 60(1984) 211; Lett. Nuovo Cim. 39(1984) 401;
Ya.B. Zeldovich and A.A. Starobinsky, Sov. Astron. Lett. 10(1984)
135; V.A. Rubakov, Phys. Lett. 148B (1984) 280; A. Vilenkin, Phys.
Rev.D30(1984) 549.
25[17] A.D. Linde, in: Proceedings of the 1989 Summer School in High
Energy Physics and Cosmology , eds. J. Pati, S. Randjbar-Daemi,
E. Sezgin and Q. Shaﬁ (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1989).
[18] A.D. Linde, Physica Scripta T36(1991) 30.
[19] E. Farhi and A. Guth, Phys. Lett. 183B (1987) 149.
[20] W. Fischler, D. Morgan and J. Polchinski, Phys. Rev. D41(1990) 2638;
Phys. Rev. D42(1990) 4042.
[21] E. Farhi, A. Guth and J. Gueven, Nucl. Phys. B339 (1990) 417.
[22] D. La and P.J. Steinhardt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62(1989) 376.
[23] A.D. Linde, Phys. Lett. B249 (1990) 18.
[24] M.B. Voloshin, I.B. Kobzarev and L.B. Okun, Sov. J. Nucl . Phys. 20
(1974) 644.
[25] S. Coleman, Phys. Rev. D15(1977) 2929.
[26] S. Fubini, Nuovo Cimento 34A(1976) 521.
[27] A.D. Linde, Phys.Lett. B70(1977) 306; Phys. Lett. B100 (1981) 37;
Nucl. Phys. B216 (1983) 421.
[28] E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B186 (1981) 412.
[29] S. Hawking and I. Moss, Phys. Lett. B110 (1982) 35.
[30] A.S. Goncharov and A.D. Linde, Sov. J. Part. Nucl. 17( 1986) 369.
[31] S. Hawking and I. Moss, Nucl. Phys. B224 (1983) 180.
[32] A.A. Starobinsky, in: Fundamental Interactions (MGPI Press,
Moscow, 1984), p. 55; in: Current Topics in Field Theory, Quan-
tum Gravity and Strings , Lecture Notes in Physics, eds. H.J. de
Vega and N. Sanchez (Springer, Heidelberg 1986) 206, p. 107.
[33] P. Arnold, Phys. Rev. D40(1989) 613.
26[34] J. Ellis, A. Linde and M. Sher, Phys. Lett. B252 (1990) 203.
[35] T.S. Bunch and P.C.W. Davies, Proc. R. Soc. A360 (1978) 117.
[36] A. Vilenkin and L. Ford, Phys. Rev. D26(1982) 1231;
A.D. Linde, Phys. Lett. 116B (1982) 335;
A.A. Starobinsky, Phys. Lett. 117B (1982) 175.
[37] A.D. Linde, Phys. Lett. 175B (1986) 395; Physica Scripta T15(1987)
169; Physics Today 40(1987) 61.
[38] A.D. Linde, Phys. Lett. B211 (1988) 29.
[39] J.M. Cline, Nucl. Phys. B345 (1990) 281.
[40] A. Mezhlumian, in preparation.
27